Executive Summary

Observed surface air temperature has been increasing since the 20th century all over Asia (high confidence1). Significant warming has intensified the threat to social and economic sustainability (medium confidence). Rising temperatures increase the likelihood of the threat of heatwaves across Asia, droughts in arid and semi-arid areas of West, Central, and South Asia, delays and weakening of the monsoon circulation in South Asia, floods in monsoon regions in South, Southeast, and East Asia, and glacier melting in the Hindu Kush Himalaya region (medium confidence). {10.3.1, 10.3.3}

Asian countries are experiencing a hotter summer climate, resulting in an increase in energy demand for cooling at a rapid rate, together with population growth (high confidence). Decrease in precipitation influences energy demand as well as desalination, underground water pumping, and other energy-intensive methods increasingly used for water supply (high confidence). More energy demands in summer seasons will exceed any energy savings from relatively lower heating demand due to warmer winters. Among 13 developing countries with large energy consumption in Asia, 11 are exposed to high-energy insecurity and industrial-systems risk (high confidence). {10.4.1}

Asian terrestrial ecosystems change is driven by global warming, precipitation, and Asian monsoon alteration, permafrost thawing, and extreme events like dust storms, along with natural and human-related factors which interact (high confidence). Treeline position in North Asian mountains moved upwards after the 1990s, while in the Himalaya, treeline demonstrates a multi-directional shift—either moving upwards, showing no upslope advance, or moving downwards. This can be explained by site-specific complex interactions of the positive effect of warming on tree growth, drought stress, changes in snow precipitation, land-use change (especially grazing), and other factors (high confidence). The considerable changes in biomes in Asia are a response to warming (medium confidence). Terrestrial and freshwater species, populations, and communities are altered in line with climate change across Asia (medium to high confidence). Climate change, human activity, and lightning have caused the increase in wildfire severity and area burned in North Asia after the 1990s (medium confidence). Length of plant growth season has increased in some parts of East and North Asia, while the opposite trend, or no change at all, has been observed in other parts (high confidence). Observed biodiversity or habitat losses of animals and plants have been linked to climate change in some parts of Asia (high confidence). There is evidence that climate change can alter species interaction or spatial distribution of invasive species in Asia (high confidence). Changes in ecosystems in Asia during the 21st century are expected to be driven by projected climatic, natural, and socioeconomic changes. Across Asia, under a range of representative concentration pathways and other scenarios, rising temperatures are expected to contribute to a northward shift of biome boundaries and an upwards shift of mountain treeline (medium confidence). {10.4.2}

In this report, the following summary terms are used to describe the available evidence: limited, medium, or robust; and for the degree of agreement: low, medium, or high. A level of confidence is expressed using five qualifiers: very low, low, medium, high, and very high, and is typeset in italics (e.g., medium confidence). For a given evidence and agreement statement, different confidence levels can be assigned, but increasing levels of evidence and degrees of agreement are correlated with increasing confidence.

Coastal habitats of Asia are diverse, and the impacts of climate change—including rising temperatures, ocean acidification, and sea-level rise (SLR)—have brought negative effects to the services and the livelihoods of people dependent on them (high confidence). The degree of bleaching of coral reefs is diverse among different presences of stress-tolerant symbionts and higher thermal thresholds. The risk of irreversible loss of coral reefs, tidal marshes, seagrass meadows, plankton communities, and other marine and coastal ecosystems increases with global warming, especially at 2°C temperature rise or more (high confidence). Mangroves in the region continue to face threats due to pollution, conversion for aquaculture and agriculture, and climate-based threats like SLR and coastal erosion. {10.4.3}

Both climatic and non-climatic drivers such as socioeconomic changes have created water stress conditions in both water supply and demand in all sub-regions of Asia, except for North Asia (medium confidence). These changes in space and time directly or indirectly have affected water-use sectors and services. By mid-21st century, the international transboundary river basins of Amu Darya, Indus, Ganges could face severe water scarcity challenges due to climatic variability and changes acting as stress multipliers (high confidence). Due to global warming, Asian countries could experience an increase in drought conditions (5–20%) by the end of this century (high confidence). {10.4.4}

The Asian glaciers were in minor-area shrinkage and mass loss during 2006–2016, resulting in the instability of water resource supply (high confidence). Glaciers in Asia are the water resources for about 220 million people in the downstream areas. The glacier meltwater in the southern Tibetan Plateau increased during 1998–2007, and will further increase until 2050. The total amount and area of glacier lakes have increased during the past decade (high confidence). More glacier collapses and surges were found in the western Tibetan Plateau. Glacier lake outburst flood (GLOF) will threaten the securities of local and downstream communities (high confidence). Snowmelt water contributed 19% of the increase in runoff of arid regions' rivers in Xinjiang, China, and 10.6% of the upper Brahmaputra River during 2003–2014 (medium confidence). {10.4.4, Box 10.4}